1294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2015

A Computationally Efficient Motion Primitive
for Quadrocopter Trajectory Generation
Mark W. Mueller, Markus Hehn, and Raffaello D’Andrea

Abstract—A method is presented for the rapid generation and
feasibility verification of motion primitives for quadrocopters and
similar multirotor vehicles. The motion primitives are defined by
the quadrocopter’s initial state, the desired motion duration, and
any combination of components of the quadrocopter’s position,
velocity, and acceleration at the motion’s end. Closed-form solutions for the primitives are given, which minimize a cost function
related to input aggressiveness. Computationally efficient tests are
presented to allow for rapid feasibility verification. Conditions are
given under which the existence of feasible primitives can be guaranteed a priori. The algorithm may be incorporated in a high-level
trajectory generator, which can then rapidly search over a large
number of motion primitives which would achieve some given highlevel goal. It is shown that a million motion primitives may be evaluated and compared per second on a standard laptop computer. The
motion primitive generation algorithm is experimentally demonstrated by tasking a quadrocopter with an attached net to catch a
thrown ball, evaluating thousands of different possible motions to
catch the ball.
Index Terms—Aerial robotics, motion control, motion primitive,
quadrocopter.

I. INTRODUCTION
UADROCOPTERS offer exceptional agility, with typically high thrust-to-weight ratios, and large potential
for angular acceleration due to the outward mounting of the
propellers. This allows them to perform complex and highly
dynamic tasks, for example, aerial manipulation [1] and cooperative aerial acrobatics [2]. The ability to hover and the safety
offered by small rotors storing relatively little energy [3] make
quadrocopters attractive platforms for aerial robotic tasks that
involve the navigation of tight cluttered environments (see, for
example, [4], [5]).
A key feature required for the use of these vehicles under
complex conditions is a trajectory generator. The trajectory generator is tasked with computing flight paths that achieve the task
objective, while respecting the quadrocopter dynamics. The trajectory must also be collision-free, and there could be additional
requirements imposed on the motion by the sensing modalities
(for example, limits on the quadrocopter velocity imposed by an

Q

Manuscript received August 23, 2014; revised February 10, 2015 and August
24, 2015; accepted September 15, 2015. Date of publication October 16, 2015;
date of current version December 2, 2015. This paper was recommended for
publication by Editor T. Murphey upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments.
This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation.
The authors are with the Institute for Dynamic Systems and Control,
ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland (e-mail: mwm@ethz.ch; hehnm@
ethz.ch; rdandrea@ethz.ch).
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TRO.2015.2479878

onboard camera). This trajectory planning problem is complicated by the underactuated and nonlinear nature of the quadrocopter dynamics, as well as potentially complex task constraints
that may consist of variable manoeuvre durations, partially constrained final states, and nonconvex state constraints. In addition, dynamic environments or large disturbances may require
the recomputation or adaptation of trajectories in real time, thus
limiting the time available for computation.
Active research in this field has yielded numerous trajectory
generation algorithms, focusing on different tradeoffs between
computational complexity, the agility of the possible motions,
the level of detail in which manoeuvre constraints can be specified, and the ability to handle complex environments.
Broadly speaking, a first group of algorithms handles the trajectory generation problem by decoupling geometric and temporal planning: In a first step, a geometric trajectory without
time information is constructed, for example, using lines [6],
polynomials [7], or splines [8]. In a second step, the geometric
trajectory is parameterized in time in order to guarantee feasibility with respect to the dynamics of quadrocopters.
A second group of algorithms exploits the differential flatness of the quadrocopter dynamics in order to derive constraints
on the trajectory and then solves an optimization problem over
a class of trajectories, for example, minimum snap [9], minimum time [10], shortest path under uncertain conditions [11],
or combinations of position derivatives [5]. In [12], a search
over parameters is proposed for quadrocopter motion planning,
including trajectories where the position is described by polynomials in time. A dynamic inversion-based controller is proposed
in [13] to directly control a quadrocopter’s position and orientation, and this controller is exploited in [14]. For a broader discussion of differential flatness, see, e.g., [15], [16], and, e.g., [17],
[18] for generic trajectory generation methods for differentially
flat systems.
A common property of these methods is that they impose
a rigid structure on the end state, for example, fixing the final state and allowing a fixed or varying manoeuvre duration,
or by specifying the goal state with convex inequalities. Many
quadrocopter applications do not, however, impose such structured constraints; instead, the set of states that achieve the application might be nonconvex, or even disjoint. Furthermore, the
conditions on the final state necessary to achieve a task may be
time dependent (for example, when the task objective involves
interaction with a dynamic environment). Methods relying on
convex optimization, furthermore, require the construction of
(conservative) convex approximations of constraints, potentially
significantly reducing the space of feasible trajectories.
This paper attempts a different approach to multicopter trajectory generation, where the constraints are not explicitly

1552-3098 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
Authorized licensed use limited
University Libraries. Downloaded on
March 25,2026 at 18:45:48
UTC from
IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Seeto: Carnegie Mellon
http://www.ieee.org/publications
standards/publications/rights/index.html
for more
information.

MUELLER et al.: COMPUTATIONALLY EFFICIENT MOTION PRIMITIVE FOR QUADROCOPTER TRAJECTORY GENERATION

Fig. 1. Presented algorithm aims to provide computationally inexpensive motion primitives, which may then be incorporated by a high-level trajectory generator. The focus of this paper is on the right-hand-side (unshaded) part of this
diagram.

encoded at the planning stage. Instead, the focus is on developing
a computationally light-weight and easy-to-implement motion
primitive, which can be easily tested for constraints violation,
and allows significant flexibility in defining initial and final conditions for the quadrocopter. The low computational cost may
then be exploited by searching over a multitude of primitives
to achieve some goal. Each primitive is characterized by the
quadrocopter’s initial state, a duration, and a set of constraints
on the quadrocopter’s position, velocity, and/or acceleration at
the end of the primitive.
The approach is illustrated in Fig. 1. The high-level trajectory generator is tasked with evaluating motion primitives, and
specifically with defining the constraints on the motion primitives to solve the given high-level goal. The high-level trajectory
generator must also encode the behavior for dealing with infeasible motion primitives. As an example, the high-level trajectory
generator may generate a large number of motion primitives,
with varying durations and end variables, to increase the probability of finding a feasible motion primitive. These motion primitives are generated in a two-step approach: First, a state-to-state
planner is used to generate a motion while disregarding feasibility constraints. In the second step, this trajectory is checked
for feasibility. The first step is solved for in closed form, while
a computationally efficient recursive test is designed for the
feasibility tests of the second step.
The state-to-state motion primitives generated in the first step
are closely related to other algorithms exploiting the differential
flatness of the quadrocopter dynamics to plan position trajectories that are polynomials in time (see, e.g., [5], [9], [12]). In
this paper, an optimal control problem is solved, whose objective function is related to minimizing an upper bound of the
product of the quadrocopter inputs, to yield position trajectories
characterized by fifth-order polynomials in time. A key property
that is then exploited is that the specific polynomials allow for
the rapid verification of constraints on the system’s inputs, and
constraints on the position, velocity, and/or acceleration.
The benefits of this approach are twofold: First, a unified
framework is given to generate trajectories for arbitrary manoeuvre duration and end state constraints, resulting in an algorithm which can be easily implemented across a large range of
trajectory generation problems. Second, the computational cost
of the approach is shown to be very low, such that on the order of

1295

one million motion primitives per second can be generated and
tested for feasibility on a laptop computer with an unoptimized
implementation.
The algorithm, therefore, lends itself to problems with significant freedom in the end state. In this situation, the designer can
apply the presented approach to rapidly search over the space
of end states and trajectory durations which would achieve the
high level goal. This ability to quickly evaluate a vast number of candidate trajectories is achieved at the expense of not
directly considering the feasibility constraints in the trajectory
generation phase, but rather verifying feasibility a posteriori.
For certain classes of trajectories, explicit guarantees can be
given on the existence of feasible motion primitives as a function
of the problem data. Specifically, for rest-to-rest manoeuvres, a
bound on the motion primitive duration is explicitly calculated
as a function of the distance to be translated and the system’s
input constraints. Furthermore, bounds on the velocity during
the rest-to-rest manoeuvre are explicitly calculated, and it is
shown that the position feasibility of rest-to-rest trajectories can
be directly asserted if the allowable flight space is convex.
An experimental demonstration of the algorithm is presented
where the motion primitive generator is encapsulated in a highlevel trajectory generation algorithm. The goal is for a quadrocopter with an attached net to catch a thrown ball. The catching
trajectories must be generated in real time, because the ball’s
flight is not repeatable. Furthermore, for a given ball trajectory,
the ball can be caught in many different ways (quadrocopter
positions and orientations). The computational efficiency of the
presented approach is exploited to do an exhaustive search over
these possibilities in real time.
An implementation of the algorithm presented in this paper
in both C++ and Python is made available in [19].
This paper follows on previous work presented at conferences [20], [21]. A related cost function, the same dynamics
model, and a related decoupled planning approach were presented in [20]. Preliminary results of the fundamental stateto-state motion primitive generation algorithm were presented
in [21]. This paper extends these previous results by presenting
the following:
1) conditions under which primitives are guaranteed to be
feasible;
2) an investigation into the completeness of the approach,
by comparing rest-to-rest trajectories to the time optimal
rest-to-rest trajectories;
3) a challenging novel demonstration to show the capabilities
of the approach.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: The
quadrocopter model and problem statement are given in
Section II, with the motion primitive generation scheme presented in Section III. A computationally efficient algorithm
to determine feasibility of generated trajectories is presented
in Section IV. The choice of coordinate system is discussed
in Section V. In Section VI, classes of problems are discussed
where the existence of feasible trajectories can be guaranteed.
The performance of the presented approach is compared with
the system’s physical limits in Section VII. The computational
cost of the algorithm is measured in Section VIII, and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1296

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2015

in the body-fixed frame, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Finally, [[ω×]]
is the skew-symmetric matrix form of the vector cross product
such that
⎤
⎡
0
−ω3 ω2
⎥
⎢
0
−ω1 ⎦.
(3)
[[ω×]] = ⎣ ω3
−ω2

ω1

0

demonstration of catching a ball is presented in Section IX.
A conclusion is given in Section X.

It should be noted that the preceding model may also be applied to other multirotor vehicles, such as hexa- and octocopters.
This is because the high-bandwidth angular rate controller that
maps angular velocity errors to motor forces effectively hides
the number and locations of the propellers.
1) Feasible inputs: The achievable thrust f produced by the
vehicle lies in the range

II. SYSTEM DYNAMICS AND PROBLEM STATEMENT

0 ≤ fm in ≤ f ≤ fm ax

Fig. 2. Dynamic model of a quadrocopter, acted upon by gravity g, a thrust
force f pointing along the (body-fixed) axis e3 , and rotating with angular
rate ω = (ω 1 , ω 2 , ω 3 ), with its position in inertial space given as (x1 , x2 , x3 ).

This section describes the dynamic model used to describe
the quadrocopter’s motion, including constraints on the quadrocopter inputs. A formal statement of the problem to be solved in
this paper is then given, followed by an overview of the solution
approach.
A. Quadrocopter Dynamic Model
The quadrocopter is modeled as a rigid body with six degrees of freedom: linear translation along the orthogonal inertial
axes, x = (x1 , x2 , x3 ), and three degrees of freedom describing
the rotation of the frame attached to the body with respect to the
inertial frame, defined by the proper orthogonal matrix R. Note
that the notation x = (x1 , x2 , x3 ) is used throughout this paper
to compactly express the elements of a column vector.
The control inputs to the system are taken as the scalar total thrust produced f , for simplicity normalized by the vehicle
mass and thus having units of acceleration, and the body rates
expressed in the body-fixed frame as ω = (ω1 , ω2 , ω3 ), as are
illustrated in Fig. 2. It is assumed that high-bandwidth controllers are used to track these angular rate commands. Then, by
separation of timescales, because of the vehicles’ low rotational
inertia and their ability to produce large torques, it is assumed
that the angular rate commands are tracked perfectly and that
angular dynamics may be neglected. The quadrocopter’s state is
thus 9-D and consists of the position, velocity, and orientation.
Although more complex quadrocopter models exist that incorporate, for example, aerodynamic drag [22] or propeller
speeds [23], the preceding model captures the most relevant
dynamics and yields tractable solutions to the trajectory generation problem. Furthermore, in many applications (for example,
model predictive control), such a simple model is sufficient, with
continuous replanning compensating for modeling inaccuracies.
The differential equations governing the flight of the quadrocopter are now taken as those of a rigid body [24]
ẍ = R e3 f + g

(1)

Ṙ = R [[ω×]]

(2)

with g being the acceleration due to gravity as expressed in the
inertial coordinate frame, and e3 = (0, 0, 1) a constant vector

(4)

where fm in is nonnegative because of the fixed sense of rotation of the fixed-pitch propellers. The magnitude of the angular
velocity command is taken to be constrained to lie within a ball:
ω ≤ ωm ax

(5)

with · being the Euclidean norm. This limit could be due,
for example, to saturation limits of the rate gyroscopes, or motion limits of cameras mounted on the vehicle. Alternatively,
a designer may use this value as a tuning factor to encode the
dynamic regime where the low-order dynamics of (1) and (2)
effectively describe the true quadrocopter. The Euclidean norm
is chosen for computational convenience, specifically invariance
under rotation.
B. Problem Statement
Define σ(t) to be translational variables of the quadrocopter,
consisting of its position, velocity, and acceleration, such that
σ(t) = (x(t), ẋ(t), ẍ(t)) ∈ R9 .

(6)

Let T be the goal duration of the motion, and let σ̂i be components of desired translational variables at the end of the motion, for some i ∈ I ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , 9}. Let the trajectory goal be
achieved if
σi (T ) = σ̂i

∀i ∈ I.

(7)

Furthermore, the quadrocopter is subject to Nc translational
constraints of the form
aTj σ(t) ≤ bj for t ∈ [0, T ] ,

j = 1, 2, . . . , Nc .

(8)

An interpretation of these translational constraints is given at
the end of this section.
The problem addressed in this paper is to find quadrocopter
inputs f (t), ω(t) over [0, T ], for a quadrocopter starting at some
initial state consisting of position, velocity, and orientation, at
time t = 0 to an end state at time T satisfying (7), while satisfying throughout the trajectory:
1) the vehicle dynamics (1), (2);
2) the input constraints (4), (5);
3) the Nc affine translational constraints (8).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MUELLER et al.: COMPUTATIONALLY EFFICIENT MOTION PRIMITIVE FOR QUADROCOPTER TRAJECTORY GENERATION

Discussion: It should be noted that the nine quadrocopter
state variables as described in Section II-A (three each for position, velocity, and orientation) are not the nine translational
variables. Only eight components of the state are encoded in the
translational variables, consisting of the quadrocopter’s position, its velocity, and two components of the orientation (which
are encoded through the acceleration). These two orientation
components are those that determine the direction of the quadrocopter’s thrust vector—given an acceleration value, the quadrocopter’s thrust direction Re3 can be recovered through (1).
These are the same components encoded by the Euler roll
and pitch angles. The translational variables do not encode the
quadrocopter’s rotation about the thrust axis (the Euler yaw
angle).
These variables are chosen because they are computationally
convenient, while still being useful to encode many realistic
problems. Two example problems are given as follows:
1) To-rest manoeuvre: Let the goal be to arrive at some point
in space, at rest, at time T . Then, all nine translational variables
will be specified in (7), with specifically the components corresponding to velocity and acceleration set to zero. Similarly, if the
goal is simply to arrive at a point in space, but the final velocity
and acceleration do not matter, only the first three components
of σ̂ are specified.
2) Landing on a moving platform: To land the quadrocopter
on a moving, possibly slanted platform, the goal end position
and velocity are set equal to those of the platform at time T . The
end acceleration is specified to be such that the quadrocopter’s
thrust vector e3 is parallel to the normal vector of the landing
platform. Then, the quadrocopter will arrive with zero relative
speed at the platform and touch down flatly with respect to the
platform.
The affine translational constraints of (8) are also chosen for
computational convenience. They allow to encode, for example,
that the position may not intersect a plane (such as the ground,
or a wall), or specify a box constraint on the vehicle velocity.
Constraints on the acceleration, in conjunction with (4), can be
interpreted as limiting the tilt of the quadrocopter, by (1).
III. MOTION PRIMITIVE GENERATION
Given an end time T and goal translational variables σ̂i , the
dynamic model of Section II-A is used to generate motion primitives guiding the quadrocopter from some initial state to a state
achieving the goal translational variables. The input constraints,
and the affine state constraints, are ignored at this stage, and
the motion primitives are generated in the quadrocopter’s jerk.
Each of the three spatial axes is solved for independently. The
generated motion primitive minimizes a cost value for each axis
independently of the other axes, but the total cost is shown to be
representative of the aggressiveness of the true system inputs.
Constraints on the input and state are considered in Sections IV
and VI.
A. Formulating the Dynamics in Jerk
We follow [10] in planning the motion of the quadrocopter
in terms of the jerk along each of the axes, allowing the system

1297

to be considered as a triple integrator in each axis. By ignoring
the input constraints, the axes can be decoupled, and motions
generated for each axis separately. These decoupled axes are
then recombined in later sections when considering feasibility.
This section will describe how to recover the thrust and body
rates inputs from such a thrice differentiable trajectory.
Given a thrice differentiable motion x(t), the jerk is written
... ... ...
...
as j = x = ( x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ). The input thrust f is computed by
applying the Euclidean norm to (1):
f = ẍ − g .

(9)

Taking the first derivative of (1) and (9) yields
j = R[[ω×]]e3 f + Re3 f˙

(10)

f˙ = eT3 R−1 j.

(11)

After substitution and evaluating the product [[ω×]]e3 , it can
be seen that the jerk j and thrust f fix two components of the
body rates:
⎡
⎡
⎤
⎤
1 0 0
ω2
1⎢
⎢
⎥
⎥ −1
(12)
⎣ −ω1 ⎦ = ⎣ 0 1 0 ⎦R j.
f
0
0 0 0
Note that ω3 does not affect the linear motion and is, therefore,
not specified. Throughout the rest of the paper, it will be taken
as ω3 = 0.
B. Cost Function
The goal of the motion primitive generator is to compute a
thrice differentiable trajectory which guides the quadrocopter
from an initial state to a (possibly only partially defined) final
state in a final time T , while minimizing the cost function

1 T
JΣ =
j(t)2 dt.
(13)
T 0
This cost function has an interpretation as an upper bound on
the average of a product of the inputs to the (nonlinear, coupled)
quadrocopter system: rewriting (12) and taking ω3 = 0 gives
⎡

ω2

⎤ 2

⎢
⎥
f 2 ω2 = f ⎣ −ω1 ⎦
0

⎡

⎤

1

0

0

⎢
= ⎣0

1

⎥
0 ⎦R−1 j

0

0

0

≤ j2

2

(14)

so that
1
T

 T

f (t)2 ω(t)2 dt ≤ JΣ .

(15)

0

If multiple motion primitives exist that all achieve some highlevel goal, this cost function may thus be used to rank the input aggressiveness of the primitives. The cost function is also
computationally convenient, and closed-form solutions for the
optimal trajectories are given below.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1298

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2015

C. Axes Decoupling and Trajectory Generation
The nonlinear trajectory generation problem is simplified by
decoupling the dynamics into three orthogonal inertial axes and
treating each axis as a triple integrator with jerk used as control
input. The true control inputs f and ω are then recovered from
the jerk inputs using (9) and (12). The final state is determined
from the goal end state components σ̂i relevant to each axis, and
the duration T is given.
The cost function of the 3-D motion, JΣ , is decoupled into a
per-axis cost Jk by expanding the integrand in (13):
3

JΣ =

Jk , where Jk =
k =1

1
T

 T
jk (t)2 dt.

(16)

0

For each axis k, the state sk = (pk , vk , ak ) is introduced,
consisting of the scalars position, velocity, and acceleration.
The jerk jk is taken as input, such that
ṡk = fs (sk , jk ) = (vk , ak , jk ) .

(17)

from which the optimal state trajectory follows from integration
of (17):
⎡ α 5
⎤
β 4
γ 3
a0 2
120 t + 24 t + 6 t + 2 t + v0 t + p0
⎢
⎥
β 3
γ 2
α 4
⎥ (22)
s∗ (t) = ⎢
24 t + 6 t + 2 t + a0 t + v0
⎣
⎦
β 2
α 3
6 t + 2 t + γt + a0

with the integration constants set to satisfy the initial condition s(0) = (p0 , v0 , a0 ).
The remaining unknowns α, β, and γ are solved for as a
function of the desired end translational variable components σ̂i
as given in (7).
1) Fully Defined End Translational State: Let the desired
end position, velocity, and acceleration along this axis be s(T ) =
(pf , vf , af ), given by the components σ̂i . Then, the unknowns α, β, and γ are isolated by reordering (22):
⎤
⎡ 1 5 1 4 1 3 ⎤⎡ ⎤ ⎡
Δp
α
120 T
24 T
6T
⎥
⎥⎢ ⎥ ⎢
⎢ 1 4
1 3
1 2 ⎥⎢ ⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢ T
(23)
6T
2 T ⎦⎣ β ⎦ = ⎣ Δv ⎦
⎣ 24
1 3
1 2
Δa
γ
T
T
T
6

Note again that the input constraints of Section II-A are not
considered here, during the planning stage, but are deferred to
Sections IV and VI.
For the sake of readability, the axis subscript k will be discarded for the remainder of this section where only a single axis
is considered. The time argument t will similarly be neglected
where it is considered unambiguous.
The optimal state trajectory can be solved straightforwardly
with Pontryagin’s minimum principle (see, e.g., [25]) by introducing the costate λ = (λ1 , λ2 , λ3 ) and defining the Hamiltonian function H(s, j, λ):
1 2
j + λT fs (s, j)
T
1
= j 2 + λ1 v + λ2 a + λ3 j
T

H(s, j, λ) =

(18)

λ̇ = −∇s H(s∗ , j ∗ , λ) = (0, −λ1 , −λ2 )

(19)

where jk∗ and s∗k represent the optimal input and state trajectories, respectively.
The costate differential (19) is easily solved, and for later
convenience, the solution is written in the constants α, β, and γ,
such that
⎡
λ(t) =

1⎢
⎣
T

−2α
2αt + 2β

⎤
⎥
⎦.

(20)

−αt2 − 2βt − 2γ

j ∗ (t) = arg min H(s∗ (t), j(t), λ(t))
j (t)

1 2
αt + βt + γ
2

⎡

Δp

⎤

⎡

⎢
⎥ ⎢
⎢ Δv ⎥ = ⎢
⎣
⎦ ⎣
Δa

pf − p0 − v0 T − 12 a0 T 2
vf − v0 − a0 T

⎤
⎥
⎥.
⎦

(21)

(24)

af − a0

Solving for the unknown coefficients yields
⎡ ⎤
⎡
⎤
α
720
−360T
60T 2 ⎡ Δp ⎤
⎢ ⎥
⎢
⎥
⎥
⎢ β ⎥ = 1 ⎢ −360T 168T 2 −24T 3 ⎥⎢
⎣ ⎦ T5 ⎣
⎦⎣ Δv ⎦.
Δa
γ
60T 2
−24T 3
3T 4

(25)

Thus, generating a motion primitive only requires evaluating the
above matrix multiplication for each axis, after which the state
along the primitive is found by evaluating (22).
2) Partially Defined End Translational State: Components
of the final state may be left free by σ̂. These states may correspondingly be specified as free when solving the optimal input
trajectory, by noting that the corresponding costates must equal
zero at the end time [25]. The closed-form solutions to the six
different combinations of partially defined end states are given
in Appendix A—in each case, solving the coefficients reduces
to evaluating a matrix product.
3) Motion Primitive Cost: The per-axis cost value of (16)
can be explicitly calculated as follows. This is useful if multiple
different candidate motion primitives are evaluated to achieve
some higher level goal. In this case, the primitive with the lowest
cost can be taken as the “least aggressive” in the sense of (14)
1
1
J = γ 2 + βγT + β 2 T 2 + αγT 2
3
3
1
1
+ αβT 3 + α2 T 4 .
4
20

The optimal input trajectory is solved for as

=

where

2

(26)

Note that this cost holds for all combinations of end translational variables.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MUELLER et al.: COMPUTATIONALLY EFFICIENT MOTION PRIMITIVE FOR QUADROCOPTER TRAJECTORY GENERATION

IV. DETERMINING FEASIBILITY
The motion primitives generated in the previous section did
not take the input feasibility constraints of Section II-A1 into
account—this section revisits these and provides computationally inexpensive tests for the feasibility/infeasibility of a given
motion primitive with respect to the input constraints of (4)
and (5). This section also provides a computationally inexpensive method to calculate the extrema of an affine combination of
the translational variables along the primitive, allowing to test
constraints of the form (8). In Section VI, conditions are given
under which feasible motion primitives are guaranteed to exist.
A. Input Feasibility
Given some time interval T = [τ1 , τ2 ] ⊆ [0, T ] and three
triple integrator trajectories of the form (22) with their corresponding jerk inputs jk (t), the goal is to determine whether
corresponding inputs to the true system f and ω, as used in
(1) and (2), satisfy feasibility requirements of Section II-A1.
The choice of T is revisited when describing the recursive implementation, below. The tests are designed with a focus on
computational speed and provide sufficient, but not necessary,
conditions for both feasibility and infeasibility—meaning that
some motion primitives will be indeterminable with respect to
these tests.
1) Thrust: The interval T is feasible with respect to the
thrust limits (4) if and only if
max f (t)2 ≤ fm2 ax and

(27)

min f (t)2 ≥ fm2 in .

(28)

t∈T

t∈T

¯k and ẍk , respectively) can be found in closed form
(denoted ẍ
by solving for the roots of a quadratic and evaluating ẍk − gk at
at most two points strictly inside T , and at the boundaries of T .
The extrema of (ẍk − gk )2 then follow as
¯2k , ẍ2k }
max (ẍk (t) − gk )2 = max {ẍ

f 2 = ẍ − g2 =

(ẍk − gk )2

(29)

k =1

where gk is the component of gravity in axis k. Combining (27)–
(29), the thrust constraints can be interpreted as spherical constraints on the acceleration.
By taking the per-axis extrema of (29), the below bounds
follow:
max (ẍk (t) − gk )2 ≤ max f (t)2 for k ∈ {1, 2, 3}
t∈T

t∈T

(30)

min (ẍk (t) − gk )2 =
t∈T

¯2 , ẍ2k },
min {ẍ
k

¯k · ẍk ≥ 0
if ẍ

0,

otherwise

¯2k , ẍ2k } > fm ax .
max {ẍ

t∈T

k =1

t∈T

(31)

(35)

Similarly, from (31) and (32), a sufficient criterion for feasibility is if both
3

¯2k , ẍ2k } ≤ fm ax and
max {ẍ

(36)

¯2k , ẍ2k } ≥ fm in
min {ẍ

(37)

k =1
3

k =1

hold. If neither criterion (35) nor (36), (37) applies, the section
is marked as indeterminate with respect to thrust feasibility.
2) Body Rates: The magnitude of the body rates can be
bounded as a function of the jerk and thrust as follows:
ω12 + ω22 ≤

1
j2 .
f2

(38)

This follows from squaring (12), and using the following induced norm:
⎡
⎤
1 0 0
⎢
⎥
(39)
⎣ 0 1 0 ⎦ ≤ 1.
0

0

0

The right-hand side of (38) can be bounded from above by ω̄ 2 ,
defined as follows, which then also provides an upper bound for
the sum ω12 + ω22 . The terms in the denominator are evaluated
as in (34)
3

max (ẍk (t) − gk )2

(34)

¯k · ẍk < 0 implies a sign change (and thus a zero crosswhere ẍ
ing) of ẍk (t) − gk in T .
Thus, from (30), a sufficient criterion for input infeasibility
of the section is if

3

max f (t)2 ≤

(33)

t∈T

Squaring (9) yields
3

1299

ω12 + ω22 ≤

1
j2 ≤ ω̄ 2 =
f2

max jk (t)2

k =1 t∈T
3

min (ẍk (t) − gk )2

.

k =1 t∈T

3

(32)

(40)

These bounds will be used as follows: If the left-hand side of (30)
is greater than fm ax , the interval is definitely infeasible, while if
the right-hand side of (31) is less than fm ax and the right-hand
side of (32) is greater than fm in , the interval is definitely feasible
with respect to the thrust constraints.
Note that the value ẍk − gk as given by (22) is a third-order
polynomial in time, meaning that its maximum and minimum

Using the above equation, and assuming ω3 = 0, the time
interval T can be marked as feasible w.r.t. the body rate input
2
if ω̄ 2 ≤ ωm
ax ; otherwise, the section is marked as indeterminate.
3) Recursive Implementation: The feasibility of a given time
interval T ⊆ [0, T ] is tested by applying the above two tests
on T . If both tests return feasible, T is input feasible and the
algorithm terminates; if one of the tests returns infeasible, the
algorithm terminates with the motion over T marked as input

min f (t)2 ≥
t∈T

min (ẍk (t) − gk )2 .
k =1

t∈T

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1300

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2015

infeasible. Otherwise, the section is divided in half, such that
τ 12 =

τ1 + τ2
2

T1 = [τ1 , τ 12 ],

(41)
T2 = [τ 12 , τ2 ].

(42)

If the time interval τ 12 − τ1 is smaller than some user-defined
minimum Δτ , the algorithm terminates with the primitive
marked indeterminable. Otherwise, the algorithm is recursively
applied first to T1 : If the result is feasible, the algorithm is recursively applied to T2 . If T2 also terminates as a feasible section,
the entire primitive can be marked as feasible; otherwise, the
primitive is rejected as infeasible/indeterminable. Thus, the test
returns one of three outcomes.
1) The inputs are provably feasible.
2) The inputs are provably infeasible.
3) The tests were indeterminate; feasibility could not be established.
Note that the interval upper bound of (33) is monotonically
nonincreasing with decreasing length of the interval T , and similarly, the lower bound of (34) is monotonically nondecreasing.
Furthermore, note that as τ 12 − τ1 tends to zero, the righthand sides of (31) and (32) converge, and the thrust feasibility
test becomes exact. This does not, however, apply to the body
rate feasibility test due to the induced norm in (39).
The recursive implementation of the sufficient thrust feasibility tests of (36) and (37) is visualized for an example motion
primitive in Fig. 3.
4) Remark on Convex Approximations of Thrust-Feasible Region: The feasible acceleration space of the vehicle follows
from (27)–(29) and is nonconvex due to the positive minimum
thrust value. This is visualized in Fig. 4. Nonetheless, in the
limit, the presented recursive thrust input test allows for testing feasibility over the entire thrust feasible space. This is an
advantage when compared with approaches that require the construction of convex approximations of the feasible space (see,
e.g., [20]). Consider, for example, a trajectory that begins with
zero acceleration and ends with a final acceleration of −2g (i.e.,
the quadrocopter is upside down at the end of the manoeuvre)—
such an example is shown in Fig. 4. The straight line connecting
the initial and final accelerations crosses through the acceleration infeasible zone due to minimum thrust. Therefore, no convex approximation can be constructed in the acceleration space
in which to evaluate this trajectory.
B. Affine Translational Variable Constraints
Referring to (22), it can be seen that calculating the range
of some linear combination of the system’s translational variables σ(t) [of the form (8)] can be done by solving for the
extrema of a polynomial of order at most 5. This involves finding the roots of its derivative (a polynomial of order at most 4)
for which closed-form solutions exist [26].
This is useful, for example, to verify that the quadrocopter
does not fly into the ground, or that the position of the quadrocopter remains within some allowable flight space. Specifically,
any planar position constraint can be specified by specifying
that the inner product of the quadrocopter’s position with the

Fig. 3. Visualization of the recursive implementation of the thrust feasibility
test: The vehicle thrust limits fmin and fmax are shown as dashed lines, and the
thrust trajectory is the dotted curve. First, the minimum and maximum bounds of
(36) and (37) are calculated for the entire motion primitive, shown as the dashdotted lines in the top plot. Because these bounds exceed the vehicle limits,
the section is halved, and the tests are applied to each half (second plot). The
left-hand side section’s bounds are now within the limits; therefore, this section
is marked feasible with respect to the thrust bounds (shown shaded in the plot),
while the second half is again indeterminate. This is halved again, in the third
plot, and a section is yet again halved in the fourth plot. Now, all sections are
feasible with respect to the thrust limits, and the test terminates. Note that, in the
implementation, the thrust infeasibility test of (35) and the body rate feasibility
test (40) will be done simultaneously.

normal of the plane is greater than some constant value. It can
also be used to calculate a bound on the vehicle’s maximum
velocity, which could be useful in some computer vision applications (see, e.g., [27]). Furthermore, an affine bound on the
vehicle’s acceleration can be interpreted as a bound on the tilt
of the quadrocopter’s e3 axis, through (1).
V. CHOICE OF COORDINATE SYSTEM
Because the Euclidean norm used in the cost (13) is invariant
under rotation, the optimal primitive for some given problem
will be the same when the problem is posed in any inertial
frame, despite the axes being solved for independently of one
another.
The Euclidean norm is also used in the feasibility tests of
Section IV. In the limit, as the length of the time interval T
tends to zero, both the thrust and body rates feasibility tests
become invariant under rotation, and thus independent of the
choice of coordinate system. The affine constraints of Section
IV-B can be trivially transformed from one coordinate system
to another, such that there exists no preferred coordinate system
for a set of constraints. This allows the designer the freedom
to pose the motion primitive generation problem in the most
convenient inertial coordinate system.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MUELLER et al.: COMPUTATIONALLY EFFICIENT MOTION PRIMITIVE FOR QUADROCOPTER TRAJECTORY GENERATION

1301

Fig. 4. Example trajectory demonstrating nonconvexity of the feasible acceleration space. The trajectory moves an initially stationary quadrocopter 10 m
horizontally, ending at zero velocity and with final acceleration af = −2g in 2 s (i.e., the quadrocopter is upside down at the end). The left-most plot shows the
position trajectory of the vehicle, and the middle plots show the inputs during the trajectory (with the shaded regions being infeasible). The right-hand side plot
shows the acceleration trajectory in the acceleration space, where the two concentric circles represent the minimum and maximum thrust limits (and are centered
at g) for ẍ2 = 0. The axes are chosen such that x3 points opposite to gravity, and there is no motion along x2 . Note the nonconvexity of the feasible acceleration
space.

VI. GUARANTEEING FEASIBILITY
For some classes of trajectory, the existence of a feasible
motion primitive can be guaranteed a priori, without running
the tests described in the preceding section.
For the specific case of primitives starting and ending at rest
(zero velocity, zero acceleration, and a given end point), a bound
on the end time T will be explicitly calculated in dependence
of the translation distance, such that any end time larger than
this bound is guaranteed to be feasible with respect to the input
constraints. Furthermore, the position trajectory for such rest-torest primitives is shown to remain on the straight line segment
between the initial and final positions. Thus, given a convex
allowable flight space, all primitives that start and end at rest
and within the allowable flight space will remain within the
allowable flight space for the entire trajectory.
The input feasibility of general motion primitives, with arbitrary initial and final accelerations and velocities, is also briefly
discussed. It should be noted that those motion primitives that
can be guaranteed to be feasible a priori will be a conservative
subset of the primitives that can be shown to be feasible a posteriori using the recursive tests described in Section IV. Further
discussion is provided in Section VII.

A. Rest-to-Rest Primitives
First, an upper bound on the lowest end time T at which a restto-rest primitive becomes feasible with respect to the input constraints is calculated in dependence of the translation distance.
Without loss of generality, it is assumed that the quadrocopter’s
initial position coincides with the origin, and the problem is
posed in a reference frame such that the final position is given
as (pf , 0, 0), with pf being the distance from the origin to the
final location, such that pf ≥ 0.
From (25), it is clear that the optimal position trajectory
along x2 and x3 has zero position for the duration of the primitive and, therefore, also zero acceleration and velocity.

1) Input Feasibility: The acceleration trajectory along axis 1
is calculated by solving the motion coefficients with (25), and
then substituting into (22), such that
t
t2
t3
p
−
180
p
+
120
pf .
(43)
f
f
T3
T4
T5
Introducing the variable ξ ∈ [0, 1] such that t = ξT , and substituting for the above yields
ẍ1 (t) = 60

60pf
ξ − 3ξ 2 + 2ξ 3
(44)
T2
for which the extrema lie at
√
3
1
∗
ξ = ±
(45)
2
6
√
10 3pf
ẍ1 (ξ ∗ T ) = ∓
.
(46)
3T 2
Exploiting the observation that |ẍ(ξ ∗ T )| decreases monotonically with increasing T , an upper bound Tf m i n for the end time
at which such a primitive becomes feasible with respect to the
minimum thrust constraint can be calculated. This is done by
substituting (46) for the sufficient criterion of (32), under the
worst-case assumption that the motion is aligned with gravity,
i.e., the acceleration in the directions perpendicular to gravity
are zero. Then

10pf
.
(47)
Tf m i n = √
3 (g − fm in )
ẍ1 (ξT ) =

Similarly, an upper bound Tf m a x for the end time at which
the primitive becomes feasible with respect to the maximum
thrust constraint can be calculated by substituting the maximum
acceleration bound of (46) into the sufficient criterion of (31).
Again, the worst case occurs when the motion is aligned with
gravity, and the final time can be calculated as

10pf
.
(48)
Tf m a x = √
3 (fm ax − g)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1302

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2015

Finally, an upper bound Tω m a x for the end time at which
the primitive satisfies the body rates constraint is calculated as
follows. First, the jerk along axis 1 is solved for with (21),
and t = ξT is substituted as before, to give
j1 (ξT ) =

60pf
6ξ 2 − 6ξ + 1 .
T3

(49)

This has extrema at ξ ∈ {0, 12 , 1}, and the maximum of |j1 (ξT )|
∗
occurs at ξ ∈ {0, 1} so that

max |ji (t)| = |ji (ξ ∗ T )| =

t∈[0,T ]

60pf
.
T3

(50)

Again, this maximum is monotonically decreasing for increasing end time T .
This value is then substituted for the numerator of (40), and
it is assumed that the primitive satisfies the minimum thrust
constraint so that fm in can be substituted for the denominator.
This makes the conservative assumption that the maximum jerk
value is achieved at the same time as the minimum thrust value.
Equating the result to ωm ax and solving for Tω m a x yields

60pf
.
(51)
Tω m a x = 3
ωm ax fm in
Note that this requires fm in to be strictly positive [instead of
nonnegative as specified in (4)].
Combining (47), (48), and (51), any rest-to-rest primitive
within a ball of radius pf is guaranteed to be feasible with
respect to the input constraints of Section II-A1 if the end time T
is chosen to satisfy the below bound:
T ≥ max{Tf m i n , Tf m a x , Tω m a x }.

(52)

The conservatism of this bound is investigated in Section VII.
2) Position Feasibility: It will be shown that the position
along a rest-to-rest primitive remains on the straight line segment
between the initial and final positions, independent of the end
time T . Solving the full position trajectory as given in Section
III-C1 and substituting p0 = 0, v0 = vf = 0, and a0 = af = 0,
the position trajectory in axis 1 is given by
 5

t4
t3
t
(53)
x1 (t) = pf 6 5 − 15 4 + 10 3
T
T
T
with pf ≥ 0 being the desired displacement along axis 1. Substituting again for ξ = t/T such that ξ ∈ [0, 1], the position
trajectory can be rewritten as
x1 (ξT ) = pf 6ξ 5 − 15ξ 4 + 10ξ 3 .

(54)

It is now straight forward to show that the extrema of x1 (ξT )
are at ξ ∗ ∈ {0, 1}, and specifically that
x1 (t) ∈ [0, pf ] .

3) Maximum Velocity: In some applications, it is desirable
to limit the maximum velocity of the vehicle along the motion,
most notably where the quadrocopter’s pose is estimated with
onboard vision [27]. For rest-to-rest primitives of duration T ,
the maximum speed occurs at t = T /2 and equals

(55)

Axes 2 and 3 will remain at zero so that the rest-to-rest primitive will travel along the straight line segment connecting the
initial and final positions in three dimensional space. Therefore,
given a convex allowable flight space, if the initial and final position are in the allowable flight space, all rest-to-rest primitives
will remain within the allowable flight space.

max ẋ(t) = max |ẋ1 (t)| =

t∈[0,T ]

t∈[0,T ]

15 pf
.
8 T

(56)

Thus, given some maximum allowable velocity magnitude and a
distance to translate, the primitive end time T at which this maximum velocity will not be exceeded can be readily calculated
from the above.
B. Guarantees for General Primitives
For general primitives, with nonzero initial and/or final conditions, and with possibly unconstrained end states, it is harder to
provide conditions under which feasible primitives can be guaranteed. Indeed, cases can be input feasible for some specific
end times, but become infeasible if the time is extended. It can,
however, be stated for a motion primitive along an axis k (with
arbitrary initial and final conditions and with any combination
of final translational variable constraints in the goal state) that
as the end time T tends to infinity:
1) the magnitude of the jerk trajectory tends to zero, and
2) the magnitude of the acceleration trajectory becomes independent of both initial and final position and velocity
constraints and can be bounded as
lim

max ẍk (t) ≤ max{|ak 0 | , |ak f |}

(57)

lim

min ẍk (t) ≥ − max{|ak 0 | , |ak f |}.

(58)

T →∞ t∈[0,T ]
T →∞ t∈[0,T ]

If the final acceleration is not specified, the acceleration bounds
are
lim

max ẍk (t) ≤ |ak 0 |

(59)

lim

min ẍk (t) ≥ − |ak 0 | .

(60)

T →∞ t∈[0,T ]
T →∞ t∈[0,T ]

The calculations to show this can be found in Appendix B.
This knowledge can then be combined with the input feasibility constraints (similar to the rest-to-rest primitives, above)
to guarantee the existence of an input feasible motion primitive
based on the values of |a0 | and |af |, at least as the end time
is extended to infinity. Furthermore, by expanding the acceleration trajectory from (22) and applying the triangle inequality,
the magnitude of the acceleration for finite end times can also
be bounded. This bound can then be used to calculate an upper
bound on the end time T at which the primitive will be feasible
with respect to the inputs; however, this bound will typically be
very conservative.
ALGORITHM OVERVIEW
The focus in the preceding sections is on the generation and
feasibility verification for a quadrocopter motion primitive, with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MUELLER et al.: COMPUTATIONALLY EFFICIENT MOTION PRIMITIVE FOR QUADROCOPTER TRAJECTORY GENERATION

1303

an arbitrary initial state, to a set of goal end translational variables σ̂i in a given time T . The resulting acceleration trajectory,
along any axis, is a cubic polynomial in time. These trajectories
minimize an upper bound representative of a product of the inputs, and computationally convenient methods are presented to
test whether these trajectories are feasible with respect to input
constraints, and with respect to bounds on linear combinations
of the translational variables. Guarantees on feasible trajectories
are given, with a specific focus on rest-to-rest trajectories.
In the following section, the set of end times and goal end
translational variables for which feasible trajectories can be
found with the presented approach is compared with the total set
of feasible trajectories, for the class of rest-to-rest trajectories.
The computational cost of the presented approach is investigated
in Section VIII. Section IX describes an experimental demonstration, where the presented primitives are incorporated into a
larger trajectory generator.
VII. CONSERVATISM
If the motion primitive computed with the presented approach
is not feasible, it does not imply that no feasible trajectory is
possible. There are two reasons for this.
1) The trajectories generated in Section III are restricted
to have accelerations described by cubic polynomials in
time.
2) The feasibility verification of Section IV is sufficient, but
not necessary.
This section attempts to give an indication of the space of
end times T and end translational variables σ̂i for which a
quadrocopter could fly a trajectory, but the presented method
is unable to find a feasible motion primitive. This section will
specifically consider rest-to-rest motions.
In [28], an algorithm is given to compute minimum time trajectories which satisfy Pontryagin’s minimum principle, for the
quadrocopter system dynamics and input constraints of Section
II-A. These trajectories represent the surface of the feasible region for quadrocopter rest-to-rest trajectories: given a desired
final translation, a feasible trajectory exists with any end time
larger than the time optimal end time (e.g., by executing the
time optimal trajectory, and then simply waiting). By definition,
no feasible trajectory exists for shorter end times.
Fig. 5 compares this feasible region to those trajectories that
can be found with the methods of Sections III and IV. The system
limits were set as in [28], with fm in = 1 m/s2 , fm ax = 20 m/s2 ,
ωm ax = 10 rad/s. For a given translation distance d, the desired
end translational variables are defined such that all components
are zero, except the position in the direction of motion which is
set to d.
For each distance d, the space of feasible end times was
determined as follows. A set of end times was generated, starting
at zero and with increments of 1ms. For each end time, a motion
primitive was generated, and the set of end distances and end
times (T, d) for which an input feasible trajectory was found
is shown in Fig. 5. For the sake of comparison, the guaranteed
feasible end time given in Section VI-A is also plotted.

Fig. 5. Set of horizontal/vertical final displacements for which the presented
algorithm is able to find input feasible trajectories (the lightly shaded area above
the dashed line), and the set of final displacements and end times for which no
trajectories are possible (the darkly shaded area, with the boundary as given
by the time optimal trajectories of [28]). The dotted line is the conservative
end time guarantee as calculated in Section VI-A. The white area represents
displacements that could be reached by the vehicle, but where the presented
method cannot find a feasible motion primitive.

The fastest feasible manoeuvre found with the presented algorithm requires on the order of 50% longer than the time optimal
trajectory of [28] when translating vertically, and on the order
of 20% longer when translating horizontally. From the figure, it
can be seen that the guaranteed feasible end time of Section VI
is quite conservative, requiring the order of three times longer
for the manoeuvre than the time optimal trajectory. However,
these trajectories can be computed at very low cost, specifically
requiring no iterations to determine feasibility.
VIII. COMPUTATION TIMES
This section presents statistics for the computational cost of
the presented algorithm when implemented on a standard laptop
computer and on a standard microcontroller. The algorithm was
implemented in C++. Except for setting the compiler optimisation to maximum, no systematic attempt was made to optimize
the code for speed. To evaluate the time required to compute
the motion primitives described in this paper, primitives were
generated for a quadrocopter starting at rest, at the origin, and
translating to a final position chosen uniformly at random in
a box with side length 4 m, centered at the origin. The target
end velocity and acceleration were also chosen uniformly between −2 and 2 m/s, and −2 and 2 m/s2 , respectively. The end
time was chosen uniformly at random between 0.2 and 10s. The
algorithm was implemented on a laptop computer with an Intel
Core i7-3720QM CPU running at 2.6 GHz, with 8 GB of RAM,
with the solver compiled with Microsoft Visual C++ 11.0. The
solver was run as a single thread.
For one hundred million such motion primitives, the
average computation time per primitive was measured to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1304

be 1.05 μs, or approximately 950 000 primitives per second. This
includes
1) generating the primitive;
2) verifying that the inputs along the trajectory are feasible (with the recursive test of Section IV-A3, for fm in =
5 m/s2 , fm ax = 25 m/s2 , and ωm ax = 20 rad/s;
3) verifying that the position of the quadrocopter stays within
a 4 × 4 × 4 m box centered at the origin (that is, six affine
constraints of the form (8) as described in Section IV-B).
Of the primitives, 91.6% tested feasible with respect to the
inputs, 6.4% infeasible, and the remaining 2.0% were indeterminate.
If the position feasibility test is not performed, the average
computation time drops to 0.74 μs, again averaged over the
generation of one hundred million random primitives, or approximately 1.3 million per second.
The algorithm was also implemented on the STM32-F4 microcontroller, which costs approximately €10 and is, for example, used on the open-source PX4 autopilot system [29].
One million random primitives were generated, with the same
parameters as above. The average execution time was 149 μs
per primitive (or approximately 6700 primitives per second),
including trajectory generation, input feasibility, and position
feasibility tests. If the position feasibility test is not performed,
the average computation time drops to 95μs per primitive, or
approximately 10 500 per second.
IX. EXAMPLE APPLICATION AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section presents an example of a high-level trajectory
generator that uses the motion primitives to achieve a high level
goal (as illustrated in Fig. 1). The high-level goal is for a quadrocopter, with an attached net, to catch a ball thrown by a person.
This task was chosen due to its highly dynamic 3-D nature, the
requirement for real-time trajectory generation, and the existence of a variety of trajectories, which would achieve the goal
of catching the ball. All the presented data are from actual flight
experiments.
The algorithm is applied in a naı̈ve brute force approach,
to illustrate the ease with which a complex, highly dynamic,
quadrocopter task may be encoded and solved. The multimedia
attachment contains a video showing the quadrocopter catching
the ball.
To catch the ball, the motion primitive generator is used in
two different ways:
1) to generate trajectories to a catching point, starting from
the quadrocopter’s current state and ending at a state and
time at which the ball enters the attached net;
2) to generate stopping trajectories, which are used to bring
the quadrocopter to rest after the ball enters the net.
The experiments were conducted in the Flying Machine
Arena, a space equipped with an overhead motion capture system which tracks the pose of the quadrocopters and the position
of the balls. A PC processes the motion capture data and generates commands that are transmitted wirelessly to the vehicles
at 50Hz. More information on the system can be found in [30].
The quadrocopter used is a modified Ascending Technologies

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 6. Quadrocopter with attached catching net, as used to demonstrate the
algorithm. The center of the net is mounted above the vehicle’s center of mass
in the quadrocopter’s e3 direction.

“Hummingbird” [31], with a net attached approximately 18cm
above the vehicle’s center of mass (see Fig. 6).
1) Catching Trajectories: The computational speed of the
presented approach is exploited to evaluate many different ways
of catching the ball. This is done with a naı̈ve brute force approach, where thousands of different primitives are generated at
every controller step. Each primitive encodes a different strategy to catch the ball, of which infeasible primitives are rejected
and the “best” is kept from the remainder. This is done in real
time and used as an implicit feedback law, with one controller
cycle typically involving the evaluation of thousands of candidate motion primitives. This task is related to that of hitting a
ball with a racket attached to a quadrocopter, as was previously
investigated in [21] and [32].
The catching task is encoded in the format of Section II-B by
stipulating that the center of the net must be at the same position
as the ball, and the velocity of the quadrocopter perpendicular
to the ball’s flight must be zero. The requirement on the velocity reduces the impact of timing errors on the system. Because
the center of the net is not at the center of the quadrocopter,
the goal end state must also include the quadrocopter’s normal
direction e3 —given some ball position, there exists a family of
quadrocopter positions and normal directions which will place
the center of the net at the ball’s position. The desired end translational variables σ̂ thus contains the quadrocopter’s position,
its normal direction (thus acceleration), and its velocity components perpendicular to the ball’s velocity (thus specifying eight
of the nine possible variables). The strategy for specifying these
eight variables is described below.
The ball is modeled as a point mass with quadratic drag, and
at every controller update step, its trajectory is predicted until
it hits the floor. This is discretized to generate a set of possible
catching times T (k ) , with the discretization time step size chosen
such that at most 20 end times are generated, and that the time
step size is no smaller than the controller update period.
For each of these possible catching times T (k ) , a set of candidate desired end translational variables σ̂ (j,k ) is generated as
follows. The quadrocopter’s goal normal direction is generated
by generating 49 candidate end normals, centered around the
direction opposing the ball’s velocity at time T (k ) . To convert

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MUELLER et al.: COMPUTATIONALLY EFFICIENT MOTION PRIMITIVE FOR QUADROCOPTER TRAJECTORY GENERATION

1305

Fig. 7. Sampled motion primitives at one time step of a catching manoeuvre: On the left is shown the quadrocopter’s center of mass for 81 candidate primitives
to catch a thrown ball. The primitives are shown as solid lines, starting at the position (0, 1)m, and the ball’s predicted trajectory is shown as a dashed-dotted line,
moving from left to right in the figure. The ball’s position at each of three candidate catching instants is shown as a solid circle. Each candidate primitive places
the center of the net at the ball, with the quadrocopter’s velocity at that instant parallel to the ball’s velocity. Note that the final orientation is a parameter that is
searched over, as is the thrust value at the catching instant. A total of 2812 candidates were evaluated at this time instant, which required 3.05 ms of computation.
The primitives shown passing through the ground (at 0m height) are eliminated when the position boundaries are evaluated. The right most two plots show detail
of some of these primitives, showing the quadrocopter’s orientation along the primitives. At the top-right plot, three candidate primitives are shown with different
end orientations (and only showing orientations lying in the plane of the plot). The lower right plot shows primitives to the same orientation, but with varying end
thrusts.

these candidate end normals to goal accelerations, it is necessary to further specify an end thrust value for each. The goal
acceleration can then be calculated with (1). For each of the orientations generated, ten candidate final thrust values are used,
spaced uniformly between fm in and fm ax .
Given an end normal direction, the required quadrocopter
position at the catching instant can be calculated as that position
placing the center of the net at the ball (for the 49 different
normal direction candidates, the end location of the vehicle
center of mass will be located on a sphere centered at the ball’s
position).
The quadrocopter’s velocity is required to be zero in the
directions perpendicular to the ball’s velocity at the catching
time, while the quadrocopter velocity component parallel to the
ball’s velocity is left free. Thus, eight components of the end
translational variables in (7) are specified.
For each of the candidate catching instants, there are 490
candidate end states to be evaluated. Because the number of end
times is limited to 20, this means that there are at most 9800
catching primitives of the form T (k ) , σ̂ (j,k ) calculated at any
controller update step.
Next the candidate primitive is tested for feasibility with respect to the inputs as described in Section IV-A, with the input limits set to fm in = 5 m/s2 , fm ax = 25 m/s2 , and ωm ax =
20 rad/s. Then, the candidate is tested for position feasibility,
where the position trajectory is verified to remain inside a safe
box as described in Section IV-B—this is to remove trajectories that would either collide with the floor or the walls. If the
primitive fails either of these tests, it is rejected.

Some such candidate motion primitives are visualized in
Fig. 7.
For each candidate catching primitive remaining, a stopping
trajectory will be searched for (described in more detail below).
If no stopping trajectory for a candidate catching primitive is
found that satisfies both the input feasibility constraints and
position constraints, that catching candidate is removed from
the set.
Now, each remaining candidate is feasible with respect to
input and position constraints, both for catching the ball, and
the stopping manoeuvre after the ball is caught. From this set,
that candidate with the lowest cost JΣ (as defined in Section
III-C3) is selected as the best.
2) Stopping Trajectories: At the catching instant, a catching
candidate trajectory will generally have a nonzero velocity and
acceleration, making it necessary to generate trajectories from
this state to rest. For these stopping trajectories, the goal end state
translational variables specify that the velocity and acceleration
must be zero, but leave the position unspecified. The primitive
duration is sampled from a set of six possibilities, ranging from
2 down to 0.25 s. The search is terminated after the first stopping
primitive is found that is feasible with respect to the inputs and
the position constraints. Two such stopping primitives are shown
in Fig. 8.
3) Closed-Loop Control: Each remaining candidate catching primitive is feasible with respect to the input constraints, the
position box constraints, and has a feasible stopping primitive.
From these, the catching candidate with the lowest cost value is
then selected as the best. This algorithm is then applied as an

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1306

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 8. Sampled stopping motion primitives: Two candidate stopping primitives bringing the quadrocopter to rest, starting at the catching instant of the
optimal catching primitive from Fig. 7. The quadrocopter moves from right to
left in both figures. The upper stopping candidate brings the quadrocopter to
rest in 2 s, the lower in 1 s.

implicit feedback law, as in model-predictive control [33], such
that the entire process is repeated at the controller frequency
of 50 Hz—thus, the high-level trajectory generator must run in
under 20ms. This allows the system to implicitly update the
trajectories as the prediction of the ball’s flight becomes more
precise, as well as compensate for disturbances acting on the
quadrocopter.
If no candidate catching primitive remains, the last feasible
trajectory is used as reference trajectory, tracked under feedback control. This typically happens at the end of the motion,
as the end time goes to zero. After the ball is caught, the stopping primitive is executed. The stopping primitive is used as a
reference trajectory tracked by the controller described in [30].
The completed catching trajectory corresponding to the candidates of Fig. 7 is shown in Fig. 9. The catching manoeuvre
lasted 1.63 s, during which a total of 375 985 motion primitives
were evaluated (including both catching and stopping manoeuvres). To catch the ball, the quadrocopter translated a distance
of 2.93 m, having started at rest.
The attached video shows that the quadrocopter manages to
catch thrown balls, validating the brute-force approach used to
encode this problem. The video also shows the acrobatic nature
of the resulting manoeuvres.
X. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a motion primitive that is computationally efficient both to generate and to test for feasibility.
The motion primitive starts at an arbitrary quadrocopter state
and generates a thrice differentiable position trajectory guiding
the quadrocopter to a set of desired end translational variables
(consisting of any combination of components of the vehicle’s
position, velocity, and acceleration). The acceleration allows
for the encoding of two components of the vehicle’s attitude.
The time to calculate a motion primitive and apply input and
translational feasibility tests is shown to be on the order of a
microsecond on a standard laptop computer.
The algorithm is experimentally demonstrated by catching
a thrown ball with a quadrocopter, where it is used as part of
an implicit feedback controller. In the application, thousands of

Fig. 9. Actual trajectory flown to catch the ball shown in Fig. 7. The top-most
plot shows the ball’s flight shown as a dashed-dotted line, and the ball’s position
at the catching instant shown as a solid circle. Note that the offset between
the vehicle and the ball at the catching instant is due to the net’s offset from
the quadrocopter’s center of mass. The three lower plots show the manoeuvre
history, until the catching instant, with (from top to bottom) the quadrocopter’s
velocity, attitude, and thrust commands. The attitude of the vehicle is shown
using the conventional 3-2-1 Euler yaw-pitch-roll sequence [24]. The bottom
plot shows the thrust command, which can be seen to be within the limits
of 5–25 m · s−2 . It should be noted that the motion primitives are applied as an
implicit feedback law, and thus, the flown trajectory does not correspond to any
single planned motion primitive.

candidate primitives are calculated and evaluated per controller
update step, allowing the search over a large space of possible
catching manoeuvres.
The algorithm appears well suited to problems requiring to
search over a large trajectory space, such as probabilistic planning algorithms [34], or the problem of planning for dynamic
tasks with multiple vehicles in real time, similar to [35]. The
algorithm may be especially useful if the high-level goal is described by nonconvex constraints.
The presented motion primitive is independent of the quadrocopter’s rotation about its thrust axis (the Euler yaw angle). This
is reflected in that the resulting commands do not specify a yaw
rate, ω3 . A useful extension would be to compute an input trajectory for the quadrocopter yaw rate to achieve a desired final
yaw angle.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MUELLER et al.: COMPUTATIONALLY EFFICIENT MOTION PRIMITIVE FOR QUADROCOPTER TRAJECTORY GENERATION

It is shown that constraints on affine combinations of the
quadrocopter’s position, velocity, and acceleration may be tested
efficiently. An interesting extension would be to investigate efficient tests for alternative constraint sets, for example, more
general convex sets.
Implementations of the algorithm in both Python and C++
can be found in [19].
APPENDIX A
SOLUTIONS FOR DIFFERENT END STATES CONSTRAINTS
Here, the solutions for each combination of fixed end state are
given in closed form for one axis. The states can be recovered
by evaluating (22) and the trajectory cost from (26). The values
Δp, Δv, and Δa are calculated by (24).
Fixed Position, Velocity, and Acceleration
⎡ ⎤
⎡
⎤⎡
⎤
α
720
−360T
60T 2
Δp
⎢ ⎥
⎢
⎥⎢
⎥
⎢ β ⎥ = 1 ⎢ −360T 168T 2 −24T 3 ⎥ ⎢ Δv ⎥ . (61)
⎣ ⎦ T5 ⎣
⎦⎣
⎦
2
3
4
γ
Δa
60T
−24T
3T
Fixed Position and Velocity
⎡ ⎤
⎡
α
320
⎢ ⎥
⎢
1
⎢β ⎥ =
⎢
⎣ ⎦ T 5 ⎣ −200T
γ
40T 2

−120T
72T

2

−12T

3

Fixed Position and Acceleration
⎡ ⎤
⎡
⎤
α
90
−15T 2 

⎢ ⎥
⎢
⎥ Δp
3 ⎥
⎢ β ⎥ = 1 ⎢ −90T
15T ⎦
.
⎣ ⎦ 2T 5 ⎣
Δa
2
4
γ
30T
−3T
Fixed Velocity and Acceleration
⎡
⎤
⎡ ⎤
0
0
α


⎢
⎥ Δv
⎢ ⎥
1
⎢
⎢β ⎥ =
6T ⎥
⎦ Δa .
⎣ ⎦ T 3 ⎣ −12
6T
−2T 2
γ
Fixed Position

Fixed Velocity

⎡ ⎤
⎡
⎤
α
20
⎢ ⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢ β ⎥ = 1 ⎢ −20T ⎥ Δp.
⎣ ⎦ T5 ⎣
⎦
2
γ
10T
⎡ ⎤
⎡
⎤
α
0
⎢ ⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢ β ⎥ = 1 ⎢ −3 ⎥ Δv.
⎣ ⎦ T3 ⎣
⎦
γ
3T

Fixed Acceleration
⎡ ⎤
⎡ ⎤
α
0
⎢ ⎥
⎢ ⎥
1
⎢ β ⎥ = ⎢ 0 ⎥ Δa.
⎣ ⎦ T ⎣ ⎦
γ
1

APPENDIX B
DERIVATION OF ACCELERATION BOUNDS
In Section VI-B, the claim is made that the acceleration can
be bounded as the end time T tends to infinity. This is shown
here for each of the different combination of end translational
variable constraints. The constraints will be divided into those
that constrain the final acceleration, and those that do not.
A. Constrained Final Acceleration
If the final acceleration is specified, it will be shown that the
acceleration can be bounded as in (57) and (58).
1) Fixed Position, Velocity, and Acceleration: Substituting
for the parameters α, β, and γ from (61) into (22), the acceleration trajectory for a fully specified set of end translational
variables is
3af
18a0
9a0
12af 2
t+
t + 2 t2 −
t
T
T
T
T2
36t
24t
10a0
10af 3
− 2 v0 − 2 vf − 3 t 3 +
t
T
T
T
T3
60p0
60pf
96v0
84vf
− 3 t + 3 t + 3 t2 + 3 t2
T
T
T
T
180p0 2 180pf 2 60v0 3 60vf 3
+
t −
t − 4 t − 4 t
T4
T4
T
T
120p0 3 120pf 3
−
t +
t .
T5
T5

ẍ(t) = a0 −

⎤



⎥ Δp
⎥
⎦ Δv .

(62)

(63)

1307

(68)

Introducing the variable ξ := t/T ∈ [0, 1] and letting T → ∞
yields
lim ẍ(ξT ) = − 10a0 ξ 3 + 18a0 ξ 2 − 9a0 ξ

T →∞

+ a0 + 10af ξ 3 − 12af ξ 2 + 3af ξ.

(69)

(64)

(65)

(66)

The above does not contain the initial and final position or
velocity, as was claimed in Section VI-B. This means that in
the limit as the duration T tends to infinity, the acceleration
trajectory becomes independent of the position and velocity, for
a fully defined end state. Next, it will be shown that (57) and (58)
hold.
To do this, three cases will be examined independently:
1) Case 1: a0 = af = 0.
2) Case 2: |af | ≤ |a0 |.
3) Case 3: |af | > |a0 |.
For Case 1, trivially, the right-hand side of (69) goes to zero,
such that
lim ẍ(ξT ) = 0.

T →∞

(67)

(70)

For Case 2, we define the ratio ρ2 = af /a0 ∈ [−1, 1]. It will
be shown that the ratio between the maximum acceleration along
the trajectory and the initial acceleration a0 is in the range
[−1, 1]. Substituting into (69) yields the acceleration ratio as a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2015

B. Unconstrained Final Acceleration

function φ2 (ξ, ρ2 ) of two variables:
ẍ(ξT )|a f =ρ 2 a 0
T →∞
a0

φ2 (ξ, ρ2 ) := lim

= ξ 3 (10ρ1 − 10) + ξ 2 (−12ρ1 + 18)

(71)

+ 3ξ (ρ1 − 3) + 1.
The extrema of φ2 over ξ ∈ [0, 1] and ρ2 ∈ [−1, 1] can be calculated straightforwardly and the minimum and maximum value
of φ2 calculated. From this, the following can be calculated
φ2 (ξ, ρ2 ) ∈ [−1, 1]

If the final acceleration is not fixed, the procedure in Appendix
B-A1 must be modified slightly.
1) Fixed Position and Velocity: Analogously to (69), the acceleration in this case is
14a0
8a0
28t
12t
t + 2 t 2 − 2 v0 − 2 vf
ẍ(t) = a0 −
T
T
T
T
−

36vf
100p0 2 100pf 2 100t3 v0
+ 3 t2 +
t −
t −
T
T4
T4
3T 4

(72)

from which, it then follows that ∀ξ ∈ [0, 1], |af | ≤ |a0 |:
lim |ẍ(ξT )| ≤ max{|a0 | , |af |}.

T →∞

φ3 (ξ, ρ3 ) := lim

T →∞

ẍ(ξT )|a 0 =ρ 3 a f
af

= ρ2 + ξ 3 (−10ρ2 + 10) + ξ 2 (18ρ2 − 12)

(74)

− 3ξ (3ρ2 − 1) .
Similar to Case 2 above, the extrema of φ3 over ξ ∈ [0, 1]
and ρ3 ∈ [−1, 1] can be calculated. Note that the closed interval
is used for ρ3 , for convenience. Then
φ3 (ξ, ρ3 ) ∈ [−1, 1]

−

(73)

For Case 3, we define the ratio ρ3 = a0 /af ∈ (−1, 1). It will
be shown that the ratio between the acceleration extrema along
the trajectory and the acceleration af is in the range [−1, 1].
Substituting into (69) again yields the acceleration ratio as a
function of two variables φ3 (ξ, ρ3 ):

lim |ẍ(ξT )| ≤ max{|a0 | , |af |}.

lim ẍ(ξt) = −

2af
3a0
4a0
3af
t−
t + 2 t2 + 2 t2
T
T
T
T
(77)
6t
6t
6v0
6vf
− 2 v0 + 2 vf + 3 t 2 − 3 t 2 .
T
T
T
T
Analogously to (69), the limit can be taken, and the variable ξ
introduced:
ẍ(t) = a0 −

lim ẍ(ξT ) = 3a0 ξ 2 − 4a0 ξ + a0 + 3af ξ 2 − 2af ξ.

(78)

a0 t af t
+
.
T
T

(79)

From this, and noting that t/T ∈ [0, 1], (57) and (58) follow
trivially.

(81)

From this, (59) and (60) follow.
2) Fixed Position: The acceleration trajectory in this case is
5a0
5a0
10t
5a0 t3
t + 2 t 2 − 2 v0 −
T
T
T
3T 3
10p0
10pf
10v0
10p0
− 3 t + 3 t + 3 t2 + 4 t2
T
T
T
T

ẍ(t) = a0 −

(83)

10pf 2 10t3 v0
10p0 t3
10pf t3
t
−
−
+
.
T4
3T 4
3T 5
3T 5

Introducing again the variable ξ = t/T ∈ [0, 1] and letting
T → ∞ yields
lim ẍ(ξT ) = −

T →∞

5a0 3
ξ + 5a0 ξ 2 − 5a0 ξ + a0 .
3

(84)

For a0 = 0, the right-hand side is trivially zero. For a0 = 0,
the above can be refactored, and for ξ ∈ [0, 1]


ẍ(ξT )
5
2
lim
(85)
= − ξ 3 + 5ξ 2 − 5ξ + 1 ∈ − , 1 .
T →∞ a0
3
3
From this, (59) and (60) follow.
3) Fixed Velocity: The acceleration trajectory in this case is
ẍ(t) = a0 −

Applying the same three cases as above, (57) and (58) follow.
3) Fixed Acceleration: If only the end acceleration is specified, the acceleration trajectory is
ẍ(t) = a0 −

20a0 3
ξ + 14a0 ξ 2 − 8a0 ξ + a0 .
3

For a0 = 0, the right-hand side is trivially zero. For a0 = 0,
the above can be refactored, and for ξ ∈ [0, 1]


ẍ(ξT )
20
29
lim
= − ξ 3 + 14ξ 2 − 8ξ + 1 ∈ − , 1 . (82)
T →∞ a0
3
75

−

2) Fixed Velocity and Acceleration: If only the velocity and
acceleration are fixed, the same procedure can be used as
above, specifically evaluating the same three cases. Analogously
to (68), the acceleration trajectory is

T →∞

20vf 3 160p0 t3
160pf t3
t
−
+
.
T4
3T 5
3T 5

T →∞

(75)

(76)

(80)

Introducing again the variable ξ = t/T ∈ [0, 1] and letting
T → ∞ yields

from which it follows that ∀ξ ∈ [0, 1], |af | > |a0 |:
T →∞

20a0 t3
40p0
40pf
64v0
− 3 t + 3 t + 3 t2
3T 3
T
T
T

3a0 t2
3a0
3t
t+
− 2 v0
T
2T 2
T

3t
3t2 v0
3t2 vf
+ 2 vf +
−
.
T
2T 3
2T 3

(86)

Introducing again the variable ξ = t/T ∈ [0, 1] and letting
T → ∞ yields
lim ẍ(ξT ) =

T →∞

3a0 2
ξ − 3a0 ξ + a0 .
2

(87)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MUELLER et al.: COMPUTATIONALLY EFFICIENT MOTION PRIMITIVE FOR QUADROCOPTER TRAJECTORY GENERATION

For a0 = 0, the right-hand side is trivially zero. For a0 = 0,
the above can be refactored, and for ξ ∈ [0, 1]


ẍ(ξT )
3 2
1
= ξ − 3ξ + 1 ∈ − , 1 .
lim
T →∞ a0
2
2

(88)

From this, (59) and (60) follow.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The Flying Machine Arena is the result of contributions
of many people, a full list of which can be found at
http://flyingmachinearena.org/.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Bellens, J. De Schutter, and H. Bruyninckx, “A hybrid pose/wrench
control framework for quadrotor helicopters,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom., 2012, pp. 2269–2274.
[2] R. Ritz, M. W. Mueller, M. Hehn, and R. D’Andrea, “Cooperative quadrocopter ball throwing and catching,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., 2012, pp. 4972–4978.
[3] G. M. Hoffmann, H. Huang, S. L. Waslander, and C. J. Tomlin, “Quadrotor
helicopter flight dynamics and control: Theory and experiment,” in Proc.
AIAA Guidance, Navigation, Control Conf., 2007, pp. 1–20.
[4] S. Grzonka, G. Grisetti, and W. Burgard, “A fully autonomous indoor
quadrotor,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 90–100, Feb. 2012.
[5] C. Richter, A. Bry, and N. Roy, “Polynomial trajectory planning for
quadrotor flight,” presented at Robotics: Science and Systems, Workshop
on Resource-Efficient Integration of Perception, Control and Navigation
for Micro Aerial Vehicles, 2013.
[6] G. M. Hoffmann, S. L. Waslander, and C. J. Tomlin, “Quadrotor helicopter
trajectory tracking control,” in Proc. AIAA Guidance, Navigation Control
Conf. Exhibit, Honolulu, HI, USA, Aug. 2008, pp. 1–14.
[7] I. D. Cowling, O. A. Yakimenko, J. F. Whidborne, and A. K. Cooke, “A
prototype of an autonomous controller for a quadrotor UAV,” in Proc. Eur.
Control Conf., Kos, Greece, 2007, pp. 1–8.
[8] Y. Bouktir, M. Haddad, and T. Chettibi, “Trajectory planning for a quadrotor helicopter,” in Proc. Mediterranean Conf. Control Autom., Jun. 2008,
pp. 1258–1263.
[9] D. Mellinger and V. Kumar, “Minimum snap trajectory generation and
control for quadrotors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2011, pp.
2520–2525.
[10] M. Hehn and R. D’Andrea, “Quadrocopter trajectory generation and control,” in Proc. IFAC World Congr., vol. 18, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1485–1491.
[11] M. P. Vitus, W. Zhang, and C. J. Tomlin, “A hierarchical method for
stochastic motion planning in uncertain environments,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2012, pp. 2263–2268.
[12] I. D. Cowling, O. A. Yakimenko, J. F. Whidborne, and A. K. Cooke,
“Direct method based control system for an autonomous quadrotor,” J.
Intell. Robot. Syst., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 285–316, 2010.
[13] J. Wang, T. Bierling, L. Höcht, F. Holzapfel, S. Klose, and A. Knoll,
“Novel dynamic inversion architecture design for quadrocopter control,”
in Advances in Aerospace Guidance, Navigation and Control. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2011, pp. 261–272.
[14] M. W. Achtelik, S. Lynen, M. Chli, and R. Siegwart, “Inversion based
direct position control and trajectory following for micro aerial vehicles,”
in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2013, pp. 2933–2939.
[15] M. Fliess, J. Lévine, P. Martin, and P. Rouchon, “Flatness and defect of
non-linear systems: Introductory theory and examples,” Int. J. Control,
vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 1327–1361, 1995.
[16] R. M. Murray, M. Rathinam, and W. Sluis, “Differential flatness of mechanical control systems: A catalog of prototype systems,” in Proc. ASME
Int. Mech. Eng. Congr. Expo., 1995.
[17] N. Faiz, S. Agrawal, and R. Murray, “Differentially flat systems with
inequality constraints: An approach to real-time feasible trajectory generation,” J. Guidance, Control, Dyn., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 219–227, 2001.
[18] C. Louembet, F. Cazaurang, and A. Zolghadri, “Motion planning for flat
systems using positive b-splines: An LMI approach,” Automatica, vol. 46,
no. 8, pp. 1305–1309, 2010.

1309

[19] M. W. Mueller. (2015). Quadrocopter Trajectory Generator, Zurich,
Switzerland. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/markwmuller/
RapidQuadrocopterTrajectories
[20] M. W. Mueller and R. D’Andrea, “A model predictive controller for
quadrocopter state interception,” in Proc. Eur. Control Conf., 2013,
pp. 1383–1389.
[21] M. W. Mueller, M. Hehn, and R. D’Andrea, “A computationally efficient
algorithm for state-to-state quadrocopter trajectory generation and feasibility verification,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2013,
pp. 3480–3486.
[22] P. Martin and E. Salaün, “The true role of accelerometer feedback
in quadrotor control,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2010,
pp. 1623–1629.
[23] R. Mahony, V. Kumar, and P. Corke, “Aerial vehicles: Modeling, estimation, and control of quadrotor,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 20–32, Sep. 2012.
[24] P. H. Zipfel, Modeling and Simulation of Aerospace Vehicle Dynamics
Second Edition. Washington, DC, USA: AIAA, 2007.
[25] D. P. Bertsekas, Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control, Vol. I.
Belmont, MA, USA: Athena Scientific, 2005.
[26] P. Borwein and T. Erdélyi, Polynomials and Polynomial Inequalities (ser.
Graduate Texts in Mathematics Series). New York, NY, USA: Springer,
1995.
[27] M. Achtelik, S. Weiss, M. Chli, and R. Siegwart, “Path planning for motion
dependent state estimation on micro aerial vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom., 2013, pp. 3926–3932.
[28] M. Hehn, R. Ritz, and R. D’Andrea, “Performance benchmarking of
quadrotor systems using time-optimal control,” Auton. Robots, vol. 33,
pp. 69–88, 2012.
[29] L. Meier, P. Tanskanen, L. Heng, G. Lee, F. Fraundorfer, and M. Pollefeys,
“ PIXHAWK: A micro aerial vehicle design for autonomous flight using
onboard computer vision,” Auton. Robots, vol. 33, nos. 1/2, pp. 21–39,
2012.
[30] S. Lupashin, M. Hehn, M. W. Mueller, A. P. Schoellig, M. Sherback, and
R. D’Andrea, “A platform for aerial robotics research and demonstration:
The Flying Machine Arena,” Mechatronics, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 41–54,
2014.
[31] D. Gurdan, J. Stumpf, M. Achtelik, K.-M. Doth, G. Hirzinger, and
D. Rus, “Energy-efficient autonomous four-rotor flying robot controlled at
1 kHz,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Apr. 2007, pp. 361–366.
[32] M. W. Mueller, S. Lupashin, and R. D’Andrea, “Quadrocopter ball juggling,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2011, pp. 5113–
5120.
[33] C. E. Garcı́a, D. M. Prett, and M. Morari, “Model predictive control:
Theory and practice–a survey,” Automatica, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 335–348,
1989.
[34] E. Frazzoli, M. Dahleh, and E. Feron, “Real-time motion planning for
agile autonomous vehicles,” J. Guidance Control Dyn., vol. 25, no. 1,
pp. 116–129, 2002.
[35] M. Sherback, O. Purwin, and R. D’Andrea, “ Real-time motion planning and control in the 2005 cornell robocup system,” in Robot Motion
and Control (ser. Lecture Notes in Control and Information Sciences),
vol. 335, K. Kozlowski, Ed. London, U.K.: Springer, 2006,
pp. 245–263.

Mark W. Mueller received the B.Eng. degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Pretoria,
Pretoria, South Africa, in 2009, and the M.Sc. degree in mechanical engineering from the ETH Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland, in 2011. He is currently working toward the Doctoral degree with the Institute for
Dynamic Systems and Control, ETH Zurich.
Dr. Mueller received awards for the best mechanical engineering thesis, and the best aeronautical thesis, for his bachelors thesis in 2008, and received the
Jakob Ackeret award from the Swiss Association of
Aeronautical Sciences for his masters thesis in 2011. His masters studies were
supported by a scholarship from the Swiss Government.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1310

Markus Hehn received the Diplom-Ingenieur degree in mechatronics from TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt,
Germany, in 2009, and the Doctor of Sciences degree
from ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, in 2014.
He has worked on optimizing the operating strategy of Diesel engines to reduce emissions and fuel
consumption, on the characterization of component
load profiles for axle split hybrid vehicle drivetrains,
and on the performance development of Formula One
racing engines. His main research interests include
the control and trajectory generation for multirotor
vehicles during fast maneuvering, optimality-based maneuvers, multivehicle
coordination, and learning algorithms.
Dr. Hehn received a scholarship from Robert Bosch GmbH for his graduate
studies and the Jakob-Ackeret Prize of the Swiss Association of Aeronautical
Sciences for his doctoral thesis.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 31, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2015

Raffaello D’Andrea received the B.Sc. degree in
engineering science from the University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1991, and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
in 1992 and 1997, respectively.
He was an Assistant Professor and, then, an Associate Professor with Cornell University from 1997
to 2007. While on leave from Cornell University,
from 2003 to 2007, he cofounded Kiva Systems,
where he led the systems architecture, robot design,
robot navigation and coordination, and control algorithms efforts. He is currently a Professor of dynamic systems and control with ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Carnegie Mellon University Libraries. Downloaded on March 25,2026 at 18:45:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
